Along the Way

Questions for each day:
What is the “big picture” message of this story?
What is God saying to you in this story?
How do you relate to this story?
Do you have any questions?
Was anything surprising? Frustrating? Disappointing?

WEEK ONE: NOAH

Noah's journey is primarily one of obedience. His journey was mostly monotonous and uneventful, at least, until the flood. It was a long, long string of day after day walking in obedience in what God had called him. I think this is the same type of obedience God is calling you and me to as well.

Day 1: overview
Read: Genesis 5-9
Noah is someone we feel familiar with. We have read his story in children’s Bibles and printed coloring pages of arks and rainbows. This week let’s try to read this story like it’s for the first time, and start with a blank page.

As you read jot down anything that stands out to you. Write down any questions you might have, or things you want to look into in the future but just keep reading. Beware of chasing “rabbit trails” – things that you could study that don’t really impact the story or your relationship with God. Look for the big picture of this story. Look for God. Look for what God is doing here, look for how He is responding to Noah and how Noah is responding to God.

Optional: As you read jot down a quick genealogy of Noah, or jot down a simple timeline of the events, or look up the location of Mt. Ararat on a map.

Reflect: Our reading today starts off with a genealogy, and if you are anything like me these kinds of passages kind of make my eyes gloss over and I definitely don’t feel warm and fuzzy about these verses. I’d encourage you to work hard to stay engaged through these verses. Notice how few generations there were between big events – Adam to Enoch, Enoch to Noah. These were people who walked with God. Notice the words in between the numbers and the names. There are a few really important little nuggets of insight into this story, so be on the lookout for them!

Respond:
What was the world like? What was God’s perspective?
What was Noah’s response to God? What was God's response to Noah?
What was Noah’s Mountaintop Moment?
How was Noah prepared for his mountaintop moment?
Is there anything God is showing you through the story of Noah?

Day 2: prepared and phosen
Read: Genesis 5:21-29, 6:5-22,
Today we are going to look at some of the details of this story, leading up to the flood. Keep your journal open and listen for what God is speaking to you through the story of Noah. See also Hebrews 11:6-7

Reflect: We can sometimes be tempted to think that only certain people are especially known and chosen by God, only the prophets, and only the Name-In-Lights people, but I think God’s special love and care is for all of His people. He cares for the birds of the air and clothes the flowers in beauty (Matthew 6:26, also see Job 39 and Psalm 104) and if He cares so much for them, how much more must He care for me? Psalm 139 is for you and it is for me. He has chosen each one of us, provides for each of us and has placed a calling on each one of our lives.

Respond:
How did God prepare Noah through his family heritage?
How did Noah carry on that spiritual heritage?
What did Noah's father prophesy over him? (see also Genesis 3:15  I wonder if Noah's father was thinking about this when he blessed his son).
How has God prepared you? Both for where you are in your life currently and for where you feel God calling you as you move forward?
What is God calling you to do in the future?
What is God calling you to do NOW?
Are there any areas of baby-step obedience that God is calling you to do? Maybe these baby steps are preparing you for something bigger.

Optional Extra Verses: Jeremiah 1:5, Isaiah 43:1 and 44:1-2, Isaiah 54:4-14 (esp. 9-10)

Day 3: long obedience
Read: Genesis 7:1-8:5
Optional: if you didn’t already do so on Day 1 you can jot down a timeline of events as you read if this helps.

Reflect: As you read these verses today, try to imagine what it must have been like for Noah and his family to obey God day after day after day with no dramatic intervention or sign of blessing. That sounds a lot like my life too. While I may not have heard the audible voice of God or been assigned to build an ark, there are definitely areas in which I’ve been called to obedience and honestly, it can be hard for me to wait to receive the blessing of my obedience. I’ve fasted from something for a month and it has been eye-opening to see just how immediate-reward-focused I am! I am only on week two of my fast and I’m already itching to be done, questioning if this is actually doing me any good. What must it have been like for Noah as he logged year after year after year of obedience to God’s call without much visible evidence of God’s blessing?

But before we go praising Noah and his steadfastness lets also remember the faithfulness of God. I know that in the areas of my life where I have been waiting on God the longest He has shown Himself faithful to me again and again. Just as my faith was faltering and my hope was beginning to die, God would remind me of His faithfulness to me and restore my hope. I am sure God did this with Noah too. On the days when Noah doubted (and I’m sure he had those days) God must have been there to remind him – just like He is there to remind us – not to give up.

As I’ve been meditating on these verses I have been thinking about the “middle spaces” of obedience. The dark before dawn breaks. The season between when we begin to obey and we see God really break through. I don’t know exactly how long it took to build the ark, but if you compare the age it gives for Noah in Genesis 5:32 and the age it gives for him in Genesis 7:6 that is a gap of a hundred years. It’s possible that this was the length of time that it took Noah and his sons to complete building the ark. I cannot wrap my mind around this at all, and it definitely puts some things into perspective for me.

Respond:
What have we already learned about Noah’s character?
God gave Noah specific instructions. What was Noah’s response to these instructions?
In what areas are you intentionally obeying God?
Have you experienced this type of long obedience?
Are you sometimes tempted to grow weary in your obedience to God?
What do those thoughts sound like? 
How do you stand against it?
Respond to God openly and honestly as you read the verses below. Jot down any additional verses that come to mind.
Optional Extra Verses: 2 Thessalonians 3:13, Galatians 6:9, Hebrews 12:3, Isaiah 40:30-31, 1 Peter 1:8-9 (look this up in the Message translation)

Day 4: mountaintop
Read: Genesis 8:15-9:17
This is the high point in this story, the crescendo of the song, the moment when all of the waiting and all of the sorrow, all of the darkness and storm and all of the doubting bursts open into daylight and worship and glory.

Reflect: As I read these verses I hope that my heart rises in worship too. Just as Noah's response to God on the Mountains of Ararat was worship, I also want my response to become one of worship when I have a season or even just a moment of nearness to God.

Respond:
How is God acting in this passage?
How is He responding to Noah?
What is Noah doing in these verses?
What has God done for you?
Optional Extra Psalms - 19, 30, 66, 71, 90, 91, 97, 104, 107, 125, 150
Day 5: after the mountain
Read: Genesis 9:18-24
Today we want you to spend a little while with today's reading and then spend the rest of your study time reflecting on your own journey.

Reflect: We see in our text today that Noah didn't exactly get his "happily ever after" fairy tale ending. The ending to Noah's story is messy and hard and not at all how we'd like to see this story end.

That's how our journeys with God can be too. One day we have an epic moment with God and the next is not all rosy with sunshine and rainbows, sometimes it feels like fighting down in the mud to not forget what we have learned about God and about ourselves through the valleys and on the mountains.

Respond:
What do you need to remember about the journey God has brought you on? Look back at your notes from this past week and write down anything that stands out to you.
After Thoughts: I wrestled with these verses for a while - trying to find a lesson here in this messy story. There are probably many but here is the one that God showed me: Even after our mountaintop moment we can fall into sin. Noah had spent years and years walking with God, faithfully obeying Him, and he experienced this amazing moment. And then the next verses about Noah are pretty much the opposite of how we expect this story to end. Our most precious experiences with God do not save us from the possibility of falling. The Holy Spirit is the one who keeps us and we have to lean into that grace to keep us. We can't keep ourselves from sin in our own strength alone and there is no point from which we are not vulnerable to fall. We must cooperate with the Holy Spirit and stay humble.

But also notice God's faithfulness to Noah and his family - God was faithful to Noah and his children even when they weren’t faithful to Him. In the following genealogy this is what I see: God's faithfulness. We are introduced to the family of Shem, Noah's oldest son. Shem is the Great-great-great-great-great-great (okay, you get the picture, it's like 9 generations) grandfather of Abram, whose name was changed to Abraham. Abram became the recipient of another covenant. We read about Abram's father and we see another son prepared for another extraordinary calling.

Optional Extra Verses: Psalm 51: this is a beautiful song of confession of sin. It is a reminder of the heart that God draws near to. One that is humble and repentant. Psalm 32: this Psalm is about the forgiveness of sin. There are definitely moments when, like Noah, we fall into sin and need these verses to remember that God loves to forgive. (See also Isaiah 44:21-22 and 1 Samuel 12:20-22)  Psalm 89: this is a long one but such a good one! Especially notice verses 1-7, 14-18 and verse 28.

WEEK TWO: ABRAHAM

Abraham's journey is one of obedience and patience. It is also a journey of faith and a journey of surrender. Abraham had to surrender everything he had -- every promise, everything he thought about himself, everything he believed about God. Abraham allowed himself to come completely undone. He had to lay it all down to see what God would hand back to him.

In our journey with God we sometimes see the same thing. God calls us to a place of surrender -- a moment when He asks us to lay it all down, give it all up in surrender and then He gives it back to us. Not always right away, and not usually in the same way that we held it before, but we discover that there is tremendous blessing on the mountaintop of surrender if we will be brave, trust God and go there with Him. Abraham’s journey leads him to the top of a mountain with the promise God had always intended for him – and for us.

Day 1: overview
Read: Genesis 10 - 22
Today's reading covers a lot of ground! As you read, jot down notes, questions you might have or topics you'd like to explore further. Remember that getting a better context for the story is helpful but rabbit trails are things that don't really pertain to the story and are just satisfying our curiosity. Remember to look for God in this story! Notice what He is doing and how He is responding.

Reflect: In chapter 11 we read a re-cap of Abraham's ancestry (at this point known as Abram) and a closer look at Abram's immediate family. I don't think it is insignificant that Abram's father headed to the land of Canaan.

Chapter 12 is like "chapter one" after the prologue and introduction to Abraham's epic story.

Optional: as you read write a rough timeline of the events, note some of the high points and low points of his journey with God and especially the times when Abraham built an altar or had a special encounter with God, or make a sketch of Abraham’s family tree or look up a map of the ancient Middle East and find the places mentioned in Abraham and Sarah's journey. I thought it was really interesting that this story begins at the base of the mountains of Ararat.

Respond:
Did you notice any themes in today’s reading?
What is Abraham traveling from and what is he traveling towards?
What in this story speaks to your life and your journey?

After Thoughts: Like Noah we see that Abram's father played a key role in preparing Abraham for his important role in God's story. Abram's father took his family away from their hometown and began the journey towards what would become Abraham's Promised Land. I don't think that is a small thing. Last week we looked at how God has been preparing you. Maybe revisit those notes you made and pray over them again. This week also ask God how you are preparing the next generation for His plans for them, especially if you have children. How are you helping to point the next generation of believers in the direction of the Promised Land? Ask God to reveal how you can be more intentional about this.

Day 2: promises
Read: Genesis 11:27-32, Genesis 12:1-7, Genesis 15:1-21, Genesis 16-17, Genesis 18:1-15,

In God’s initial call to Abraham and Sarah, Genesis 11:30, we learn that Sarah was barren. Now, in Genesis 12:7, God is saying that He will give the Promised Land to "their offspring", that their children will outnumber the stars and that this family will definitely come through Sarah. This must have been a difficult promise to believe. As you read, jot down God’s promises to Abraham and what obstacles Abraham and Sarah faced to the fulfillment of these promises.

Reflect: I love seeing how God renewed His covenant with Abraham again and again. It reminds me of how God has been so faithful in my life to remind me over and over again that He will be faithful to me. That He has not forgotten me. He will never abandon me. In the season of waiting for God to move it is tempting to loose heart, it's tempting to take matters into our own hands, it's tempting to give up hope but it is beautiful when God fulfills His promise to us in His time and it is exquisite the way that God faithfully and patiently reminds us over and over to have faith in who He is and in what He has promised.

Respond:
Are there any “impossible” promises you are struggling to believe?
When or how are you tempted to take fulfilling God’s promises into your own hands?
Why do you think we would choose our own way when we know God is calling us the other way?
Sarah laughed when she heard God’s promise to her, she laughed because she doubted.
 Do you have any doubters in your life?
 What do they say? 
How does this affect you?

Optional Extra Verses: This might be a good moment to bring your weary-from-waiting heart to God: Psalm 130, Proverbs 3:5-6, 1 Corinthians 1:26-32, 1 Corinthians 10:13

Day 3: birth
Read: Genesis 21:1-7
Before we get into today's reading I want you to sit with some verses in Romans that are some of my favorites.  I've emphasized the words I especially want to sink deep into your soul today:
“[Abraham] didn’t tiptoe around God’s promise asking cautiously skeptical questions. He plunged into the promise and came up strong, ready for God, sure that God would make good on what he had said. That’s why it is said, “Abraham was declared fit before God by trusting God to set him right.” But it’s not just Abraham; it’s also us! The same thing gets said about us when we embrace and believe the One who brought Jesus to life when the conditions were equally hopeless. The sacrificed Jesus made us fit for God, set us right with God.” (Romans 4:19-25 MSG)
This is who I want to be when it comes to my faith in God. I want to plunge head-first, in over my head, ready for God, sure that He will be faithful to me.

Reflect: Here is the reality of waiting on God - a lot of the time circumstances start to go the other way. This thing that God puts into our hearts feels more and more uncertain, less and less likely to come about. That loved one you've been praying for, that ministry you've been dreaming about, that calling that has always felt just out of reach. God is calling us to have faith in the middle spaces, (remember last week in Day 3?)  between the calling and the commissioning, between the covenant promise and the covenant kept. During this tough time God is inviting us into the sometimes dark, scary and confusing place -- this secret, quiet, hidden place with Him.

Abraham waited until he was one hundred years old to see God's promise fulfilled. He had this one child of promise. Abraham never saw his too-many-to-number family while he was living. He never really saw the promise fulfilled fully. Honestly this blows my mind. I cannot even comprehend waiting until a hundred years old to see a promise fulfilled. But this is who God is. He is never in a hurry. So in my impatience, I take a page from the story of Abraham and wait in faith.

Respond:
Can you relate to this passage?
Have you ever waited for a moment so long that you laughed and cried with joy when it came?
What promise has God been faithful to fulfill for you personally?
What promises are you still waiting on?

Optional Extra Verses: Romans 4:1-5:12 (esp. 4:18-22)

Day 4: sacrifice
Read: Genesis 22:1-19

This is the mountaintop moment of Abraham’s life. The moment every other moment in his life was leading him towards. I believe that all of those years of practicing faith enabled Abraham to believe God in this extraordinary act of sacrifice.

Reflect: This wasn’t just an act of obedience. It is, but that's not what this story is about. We read yesterday in Romans that it was Abraham's faith that was the important factor. "Abraham was declared fit by trusting God to set him right." (Romans 4:22 MSG)

Respond:
Do you see yourself in this story at all? Where?  How? Why?
How does what you have read today shift how you see God?
How is God speaking to you through this story?
What are you holding too tightly?
Is there anything God is asking you to give up?

Day 5: after the mountain
Read: Genesis 22:7-8, 13-18, Romans 4:1-5:12 (esp. 4:18-22) Hebrews 11:8-19 (esp. 17 and 18)

Look back at a bit of Abraham’s journey. If you haven’t read the passage in Romans yet do so today. It and the passage in Hebrews give us a unique perspective on the story we have read this week.

Reflect: I have been sitting with this story all week, turning it around and around in my mind, asking God to show me himself in this story. One day I was reading a friend's blog and she linked to a song by Nicole Nordeman called "The Unmaking"

What happens now? When all I've made is torn down?
What happens next? When all of you is all that's left?

Listening to this song I thought about Abraham at this moment on the mountaintop. What must it have felt like to take that long walk up the mountain with his only son?

I cannot even fathom this kind of surrender. Yet I have experienced little tastes of this, in moments when I have had to surrender to God my hopes, my plans, my future, my fear. I feel God calling me to surrender everything. In this moment, Abraham surrendered his identity as the father of a nation, he surrendered the promise God made to him, he surrendered to be hurt, he held onto faith, he let it all go.

Respond:
Review your notes from this past week, summarize Abraham’s journey.
Where is our hope? Is it in God Himself or in the things we do for Him? (Rev 2:15)
What is our reward? (See Genesis 15:1)
How is God calling you to walk in faith?
How is God working surrender in your life?

WEEK THREE: JACOB

Jacob is the grandson of Abraham. Just as God changed Abraham's name, God changed Jacob's name to Israel. From Jacob came the twelve tribes of Israel. I almost can't wrap my mind around how significant he is to the thread of our heritage as believers. Just like us, Jacob had a journey to go through. And just like us, God is speaking to him along the way.

Day 1: overview
Read: Genesis 24-35,45:25-46:7, 48-49
Today we are getting a sense of context for our story and doing a quick overview of Jacob’s life before we dig into his journey with God.

This is a lot of reading but it reads just like a story and I promise once you start reading you won’t want to stop. So go pour yourself a hot cup of tea and snuggle down in your favorite spot to read this epic story with a heart open to hearing what God wants to speak to you today. As you read, jot down anything that stands out to you, any questions you have and anything you want to come back to.
Optional Activities: Sketch out a family tree, write a timeline, look up Jacob's travels on a map, write a list of contrasting features between Jacob and Esau. If you’re pressed for time here are the high points of the story: Genesis 25:19-28, 28:10-22, 32:22-30, 35:1-15, 45:25-46:7, 48:15-16

Reflect: Our reading today starts with Isaac and I don't want to skip over Isaac too quickly as we begin our study of Jacob. You would think that as a child of promise there would be more to his story than there is. But here he is; not much to tell. He stayed in the Promised Land, and prayed for his wife. Here is what I want to say about Isaac - he didn't drop the ball. He was faithful. He could have moved back to where he was from and hung out with his family but he didn't. He stayed where he was supposed to be, and he continued the legacy. And this is no small thing. There is no such thing as just being faithful. Isaac’s calling wasn’t big or bold or flashy, but it was vitally important. As I read Jacob’s story I was impressed over and over with how Jacob feared the God of his father and over time that fear of the God of his father turned into his own faith.

Respond:
What did you notice about Jacob as you read?
Did you notice any repeating themes?
Where did Jacob journey to?
What moments in Jacob's journey with God could you relate to?

Day 2: dream
Read: Genesis 28:10-22
Reflect: From the moment Jacob was in his mother's womb, God had him destined to rule over his older brother. Nations would come from him. From the beginning he was blessed with success and wit. This made many he came into contact with angry and resentful. God spoke to Jacob in his dreams. Jacob had been obedient to listen to God in those dreams.

Respond:
What stands out to you?
What does it mean that God is repeating this blessing to Jacob? (verse 14)
Look at verses 20-21 and contrast this with Genesis 27:20 how does Jacob speak about God in these verses?

See also: Genesis 12:3, 18:18-19, 22:15-18, 26:3-4 Acts 3:25, Galatians 3:7-9 and 16 the phrase “in you and your offspring shall all the families of the earth be blessed” has a double meaning. It means something for Jacob in his generation but it was also a prophesy of Christ. What does this mean to us today?

Optional Extra Homework: in verse 22 Jacob closes out his vow with the promise of a tithe. If you want to look back and see the first time the tithe was recorded you can jump back to Genesis 14:17-20 when Jacob’s grandfather Abraham met Melchizedek, the King of Salem and High Priest (you can read more about him in Hebrews 7) and gave him a tenth of the spoils of war. This became a law for the people of Israel (see Deuteronomy 14:22-29)

Day 3: wrestle
Read: Genesis 32:22-31

This is a significant moment in Jacob's journey. It's a small passage. This will be your third time reading it. It can become a habit to think quantity is quality. That reading a lot makes us grow wiser. But to sit and dwell on a small passage could be where God speaks to us the most.

Read this passage again in the Message and the Amplified versions. There is some special wording in the Amplified version that might change how you see this story.

Reflect: The first thing that I notice in this story is that God came to wrestle with Jacob. Jacob wasn’t out looking for a fight. He didn’t come to pick a fight with God. The next thing I notice is that he didn’t give up. Also, this wasn’t a five minute tiff; this was an all night long wrestling match. He didn’t give up. In the end he asked for a blessing. In this moment Jacob was physically wrestling with God and he was forever changed by this encounter. We can also go through seasons of wrestling with God. I don’t know about you but I often approach wrestling with God as if I will receive a curse instead of a blessing. I am afraid to walk into the night of wrestling and demand a blessing like Jacob did.

Respond:
Have you experienced a season of wrestling with God?
Are you currently struggling with God about anything?
How do you think this story speaks to this?

Optional Extra Verses: These are Psalms primarily about our heart wrestling with God or crying out to him from a posture of desperation. Psalm 13, Psalm 22, Psalm 25, Psalm 18, Psalm 30 if you have favorite verses on this theme be sure to jot them down to share.

Day 4: remembering
Read: Genesis 35:1-15

Reflect: You may have noticed in these stories we have looked at so far that there is this powerful moment where God speaks to them, or perhaps there is a moment when everything comes to a head but that is not the end of the journey. Just like we must move on after these wonderful miraculous moments, life must move on after their moments, too. It matters what happens afterward, but it's not always up to us. See how God reminds Jacob.

Respond:
Why did Jacob travel to Bethel?
What was the significance of Bethel? (see Genesis 28:10-19)
What promise did God give to Jacob at Bethel? Compare this to the promise God gave to Jacob the last time he was at Bethel (28:13-15).
What does the name Jacob mean?(see Genesis 25:26 and also 27:36)
What does the name Israel mean?(see Genesis 32:28)
Who does God say you are?

Day 5: blessing
Read: Genesis 48:8-16

Extra Homework: By the way if you’re wondering who this guy named Nahor is (in Genesis 31:53) then you can look back at Genesis 11:27, 24:15 and 29, 28:2, 29:5)

Reflect: The blessing that Jacob gives to his grandsons is so tender. I especially love the phrase in the second half of verse 15. The God of his father and grandfather had become his God. This is something I am constantly praying for my children - that my faith would become theirs. That God would not stay the God of their mother but would become the Shepherd of their souls.

Respond:
Look back at Genesis 27:19-20 what does Jacob call God in these verses?
Flip forward to Genesis 28:20-21, Genesis 31:41-42, 51-54, Genesis 48:15. What does Jacob say about God here? Do you see the development?
Look back over the last week of homework. What has God been saying to you? What about over the last month?








WEEK FOUR: MOSES

In our study of Abraham we saw someone who didn't ask cautiously skeptical questions or tip-toe around God's promises. With Moses we see the opposite. We see someone who does ask cautiously skeptical questions of God. We see someone who battled deeply with insecurity. We see a man who doubted himself, who doubted God but who in the end was mightily used by God to lead His people.

This week we will be reading longer stories so settle in with your favorite Bible or pick up an easy to read translation and let’s ask God to open our eyes to who He is and how He moves us through the story of Moses.

Day 1: remember who you are
Read: Exodus 1-4 and Hebrews 11:23-40
In today’s reading we see another man who was chosen from before he was born. Divinely protected and miraculously prepared for the calling God had for his life. We meet Moses during his first mountaintop moment with God - the burning bush. Don’t let the familiarity of this story rob you of the tremendous emotional impact of this moment. 

This story opens with the people of Israel in trouble. Jacob’s sons had come to Egypt during the famine, but after time passed the bond between Pharaoh's family and Joseph's dimmed and died - changing the course of history. I want to pause here and heed this warning. Our spiritual heritage can do the same and I don’t want that to be true of my life. It’s so easy for me to get so busy in the day-to-day of living that I forget to pass on my spiritual heritage to my children.

Reflect: Moses must have felt God’s calling as someone who would act to help his people. This reminds me of Joseph, who as a young man, knew that he would one day be a great leader or of Jesus when, as a boy, he stayed behind at the temple. God had placed Moses’ calling deep in his heart and he was ready to act on that calling a little bit preemptively. He acted in the wrong way and at the wrong time and it hugely backfired on him. 

When Moses finally gets to walk into his calling you’d think he’d be chomping at the bit but the opposite is true. The fire inside of him seems to have died and the dreams of being a champion for his people had become faded and worn. He gave up on his God-given identity and accepted the in-this-moment reality of being a shepherd. But God came to rekindle the fire inside of Moses with a burning bush.

I think the biggest difference between how Moses responded to God’s calling and how Abraham or Noah responded to God’s calling is faith. In that moment all he seemed to have was doubt, all he could see was his lack. He couldn’t get past his own shortcomings. He needed to believe more in God’s provision than in his own inadequacy.

I believe that God has made each one of us to uniquely display His glory and beauty in the earth. He may ask us to do this in a way that is visible to a large number of people or a small number of people, but we are none of us “just a _________.” We all have a calling.

Ask God to remind you of His calling on your life. Ask Him to give you vision for your life. Ask Him to remind your heart that He is faithful and more than able to give you everything you need to fulfill your calling. Ask God to grow your faith and meet you in your doubt.

Respond: 
How are you actively and personally passing on your spiritual heritage?
Is there something in your heart about your identity that the Holy Spirit is rekindling within you? (Look back on your notes)
Have you experienced God’s calling but are waiting on His commission? Has God given you dreams that have become worn and faded in the waiting?
Have you become more aware of your own inadequacy and lack of ability than your awareness of God’s sufficiency?

Day 2: remember who God is

Read: Exodus 5-14
Today's key passage is Exodus chapter 14. If you're pressed for time today skip ahead to that, but if you can, let's get a sense of the context of this story and read the whole thing. As you read, jot down your thoughts and anything that stands out to you.  Notice repeated phrases.

Reflect: It might seem laughable from where we sit that these people were literally freaking out in the face of the Pharaoh's army but isn't that exactly what I do? In the face of a huge un-payable bill, or in the face of a hard seemingly un-fixable relationship, I have had plenty of these massive freak-out sessions with God and I love the way that Moses replies to the people. These are the words that I want to come out of my mouth in the face of an overwhelming moment. I have experienced first-hand God's faithfulness to me when I choose to be still and trust Him to take care of me. I want to be more overwhelmed by who God is than I am of the big scary things that pop up (or hang around too long) in my life.

Respond:
Try to imagine yourself in this situation. Who do you relate to? How do you think you would respond in a situation like this one? Why did Pharaoh pursue the Israelites? What is the response of the Israelites?  
Read verses 14:13-14 and notice what the people were to do:
1) _______________   
2) _______________   
3) _______________
What was the outcome of all of this?
When have you experienced God's faithfulness in a moment of freak-out and fear?
Is there anything in your life you're freaking out about right now? Pray verses 13 and 14 back to God and begin to practice choosing to be still and quiet in faith instead of the black hole of freak-out and fear. 
Is there anything that has grown out of proportion and become a plague in your life? (see below)

After Thoughts: I wouldn't say "I worship _______" but that is what my life says. An app on my phone, a TV show, unhealthy habits, an unhelpful relationship, (especially my online / social media relationships) these things (and more!) can just swallow my life and a good thing can become a plague in my life when it is out of proportion. A few frogs here and there are awesome and beneficial, a swarm of them, not so much. Today I'm pausing to ask God if there are good things out of proportion in my life, and asking that as I go about this week he will open my eyes to see it.

Optional Extra Verses: Exodus 15:13 Deuteronomy 1:30-31 and 3:22, Lamentations 3:26, Isaiah 30:15,  40:28-31, Psalm 27:14, 84:5-7,  Matthew 11:28 Romans 16:25-27, 2 Corinthians 12:9

Day 3: remembering God's presence

Read: Exodus 19, 24, 31-33
Today we're jumping around a bit. Pray for the Holy Spirit to apply the word to your heart today in just the way that you need it most.

Reflect: God called to Moses out of the mountain and the words that He spoke to Moses are words we need to remember. After the catastrophe of the golden calf, Moses spends a period of time begging God. Not asking to be protected or to prosper but asking for presence. This needs to be my prayer too. Exodus 33:18-23 is pretty much the mountain-top of all mountain-top moments with God. I notice how Moses was brave enough to ask for this in the first place. I don't know if this is something I really ask for. I do sometimes -- kind of half-heartedly -- but to truly, earnestly, expectantly ask for God to reveal His glory? This is a whole new level of brave and bold.

Respond:
In a moment when God seems silent and feels far away do I ever turn to the things that I can see and feel?  
 What was God's response to His people's idolatry? 
 What is it that Moses is asking for?
Have you experienced an extraordinary moment in the presence of God?
 What did Moses look like after he has spent time in the presence of God?
Have you met someone who reminded you of this?
Have you experienced this?
As New Covenant believers we don't have to go up on any special literal mountain to experience the presence of God, we have the promise of the presence of the Holy Spirit inside each of us.

EXTRA HOMEWORK: Exodus 17:8-13. At this mountain-top moment Moses stood with Aaron and Hur with hands raised. What happened when he lifted his hands? What happened when he lowered his hands? What did Moses' friends do when he grew weary? Do you have friends like Aaron and Hur? Are you a friend like this?

Day 4: remembering God's provision

Read: To get to today's mountain top we need to take a little journey with Moses. As you read, summarize each story: Exodus 15:22-27, Exodus 17:1-7, Numbers 20:2-13, Deuteronomy 31:1-3, 32:44-52. Now read Deuteronomy 34:1-4

Reflect: I wonder what it must have been like for Moses to stand there at the top of the mountain and see the land that his people were about to enter. This mountaintop of vision for the future must have been amazing. Sometimes when God brings us to the mountaintop it is to show us a glimpse into the future. He gives us vision for where our lives are going or a direction we need to head in.

Respond:
Have you experienced a time when you were in a wilderness: physically, emotionally, relationally, or spiritually?
How have you experienced God's provision?
Have you experienced a mountaintop moment like this with God?
Has God given you direction for your now?
Has God given you a vision for your future?

I encourage you to read today's extra verses. They speak to how God deals with us in our own wilderness moments when we need water. Just like the Israelites we can start to complain during a season of dryness, but our God is a stream in the dessert and He turns our dessert places into lush gardens by His presence. He is the water in our thirsty places.
Optional Extra Verses:  Isaiah 35:1-7, 43:20-21, 44:1-5, 55:1-2 Psalm 63:1-8, 42:1-2 John 7:37-39

Day 5: remember
Read: Deuteronomy 5, 7-8

To get a sense of context (this is towards the end of a really long speech that Moses gave) start reading in Deuteronomy 5:1-2 and then flip forward to 7:1-6 and pause here for a minute. It's hard to wrap my mind around this in the physical story of Moses but this is what I see in this story: God is serious when it comes to purity. He literally said "show no mercy" when it came to something that could cause His people to turn away from Him. God is a jealous God and sometimes I can forget that. I think He's all patient and cool and will still be there whenever I get back from whatever joy ride I've taken away from Him. Not so much. He's forgiving and compassionate and jealous. He wants my whole heart, and He wants me to show no mercy to the things that trip me up and distract me from Him.

Let's keep reading, and let's read this slowly and let the words sink in deep. Deuteronomy  7:6-11. These words, tucked in here in a book of the Bible we tend to ignore, are just so beautiful, like a love song. Look them up in a couple different translations and read them again. Try the Message translation, Amplified translation, New Living Translation, New American Standard and New King James translations. Sometimes reading a passage in different translations makes different words pop out and it causes us to re-read the same thoughts without glazing over. If you use an app like YouVersion this is really easy you can also look this up on Bible.com and choose different translations.

Read on through Deuteronomy 7:17-8:20. As you read, jot down any words or phrases that stand out to you. There is so much goodness in this passage, but the one word that seems to be repeated over and over is "remember" -- because it is so easy to forget, isn't it? It is easy to get distracted with the day-to-day and forget the big picture. It's easy to get distracted with everything that is in front of my face and forget that there is more.

Respond: 
What do you need to remember today?
Look back through your notes so far. What has God been speaking to you?
If you keep a journal, take a minute and look through it to remember what God has been saying to you and reminding you. Write it down and be prepared to share it with the group, or with an accountability partner or friend.


WEEK FIVE: ELIJAH

Day 1: overview
Read: 1 Kings 16:29-34, 1 Kings 17-19

Reflect: This week’s story is a lot shorter than the last few but make sure you dig in deep and take time to really dwell in these passages.  Elijah's story has a lot to offer in just a few chapters.  Ask the Holy Spirit to help you see what He wants you to see. Write down what stands out to you and what God is speaking to you.

Respond:
What do we know about Elijah?
What does Elijah mean?
Where is he from?
What are some of the places Elijah went to? Map it out.
Why did Elijah confront King Ahab?

Day 2: by faith
Read: Joshua 6:26, 1Kings 17,18, Hebrews 11

Reflect: The Kings in Elijah's day did evil things, but the Bible says that what Ahab did was more evil in the Lord's sight than any of those before him. (1 Kings 16:30)  Elijah believed he was the last of the prophets, because the rest were killed. So here he stands alone, but confident and full of faith.  Elijah was not confident in himself, but confident in God. Everything the Lord told him to do he did, believing God would do what He says He will do.

Respond:
What miracles did God perform through Elijah?
What was the reason for each miracle?
Do you feel like you have faith like Elijah?
Why or why not?
Explore what it means to have faith through these passages: Hebrews 11:1,6, Mark 9:1727, Hebrews 12:2
What do you think “the author and finisher of our faith” means?

Day 3 Weary
Read: 1 Kings 19:1-9

Reflect: Is it possible to grow weary even after God has done so much good and used you to do it? Yes, even Elijah who has seen many miracles of God grew weary. Not long ago he was confident and strong. But in a moment of human weakness, fear crept in and he became weary and tired. 

Respond:
How does Elijah say he feels?
How does God respond to Elijah?
This isn’t the first time God fed Elijah. Do you remember? 1 Kings 17:5-6, 17:13-16

Just as the Lord provides for Elijah, He also provides for us. We may not be in need of physical things at this very moment, but we are always in need of Jesus. He's what we need for our journey when we grow weary. He’s what we need always. His word is nourishment to our souls.

Optional Extra Verses: Isaiah 55:1-2, Matt 4:1-4, John 6:25-40, Galatians 6:9, Psalm 63

Day 4: he answers
Read: 1Kings 19:8-18

Reflect: This is the moment on top of the mountain. Elijah encounters God. He has given up to the point of wanting to die. Though God is the one who rules with His right hand (with strength and power!), He is a compassionate God. He draws near to those who draw near to Him. He doesn’t show frustration or anger towards Elijah for crying out.

Respond:
Where is Mount Horeb?
What questions does God ask Elijah?
Why is Elijah there?
Write down your interpretation of what is happening on top of the mountain.

Day 5: provider
Read: 1 Kings 19:10, 19:15-21

God asked Elijah what he was doing on top of Mt. Horeb already knowing why he was there. Just like we may talk to a child, He already has answers and He has already provided.

What did God provide for Elijah?
What do you need from God?
Are you going out of your way to ask Him, just like Elijah?

Do you believe that God is real? If so, do you really talk to Him? Nothing is hidden from him (Psalm 139:7-10, Jeremiah 23: 23-24) Be like Elijah and speak freely to Him.



WEEK SIX: JONAH
I love the book of Jonah. It’s filled with simplistic, straightforward truths that make it easy to teach our children. I think that because of this we may tend to overlook some harder questions. “Am I like Jonah?” We could find that we identify with him in good and righteous ways. But more likely we will find that we, just like him, are in need of a change of heart, a transformed heart.

Day 1: overview
Read: Jonah 1-4

Reflect: There is so much to unpack in these four chapters. Jonah is immediately disobedient to God. He runs away and pays for it big time! Then he worships God before he's even out of harm’s way. In fact, he sees this big fish as God’s provision for him! Then he goes off to do what God told him to. This entire time Jonah wears his heart on his sleeve allowing us to have a clear picture of his struggles and triumphs.

Respond:
What about Jonah's story catches your attention?
Map out Jonah's travels
What is relatable to you? Reflect and write about it.

Extra Homework: Get to know Jonah and the time he lived in. Start with 2 Kings 14:25
                                 What are some of the characteristics you see in Jonah?

Day 2: Jonah flees
Read: Jonah 1, Psalm 139:7-10

Reflect: Throughout this first chapter Jonah's character seems to be apparent by his speech. He is very honest in telling who he is, what he has done and what they should do with him. So it seems odd that he would flee from God's command. Even then, did Jonah really believe he could hide from God?

Respond:
The Bible calls Jonah “son of Amittai.”
What does Amittai mean?
What has God asked Jonah to do?
Look up information on the Ninevites.  (Nahum 2-3)
Who are they?
How are they affecting the communities around them?
Why do you think Jonah fled?

Day 3: prayer and forgiveness
Read: Jonah 2, 1 John 1:8,9, Ephesians 2:1-9

Reflect: Here Jonah is in the predicament he got himself into (been there before?).  He is in direct disobedience to God, but God forgives. In fact God placed Jonah in this moment of surrender. Giving him a chance to repent and worship right where he is. Jonah was sure death was his next destination. So he was THANKFUL to be in the belly of a fish!

Respond:
Has God ever taken you out of a situation you put yourself into?
What did you learn about yourself and God in these moments?
Sometimes the things God uses to save us or grow us is not what we expected, but they are the best! He always knows better! Can you remember any of those times in your life?
Ask the Holy Spirit to speak to you. Write out your thoughts and reflections for today.

Day 4: repentance
Read: Jonah 3, Ezekiel 18:21-23

Reflect: To repent means to turn away from what is evil and to turn towards God. In chapter 2 Jonah repents of his disobedience and says he will "make good on his vow."  Now, in chapter 3, the Ninevites have repented as a result of Jonah's obedience.  Jesus cares for not just us, but for those around us. How we respond to Him directly affects those around us.

Respond:
What is your response to Jesus in your life?
How is that affecting those close to you?
Are there things you need to repent from?
What would turning towards God look like in your life?

Day 5: not fair
Read: Jonah 4, Luke 6:27-36, Ephesians 6:12

Reflect: I laugh to myself when I read this last chapter. I laugh because it's so easy to see Jonah's stubbornness looking in from the outside, but I can be the same way.  We see some people as evil and others as good.  We are quick to judge another's faults and hate to see them come out on top. God, however, is the Creator. He loves his creation and longs to see all of us succeed. 

Respond:
Why is Jonah angry? 
 What lesson is God trying to teach Jonah through the vine? (Jonah 4:5-11)
Who are your enemies?
It's hard to love our enemies. What’s a step we can take to show we love them?

Extra Homework: Jesus told parables to help us understand how His kingdom works. His ways are not our ways. Even though the Ninevites repented of their ways, Jonah didn't want to see them prosper.  He was angry with God for His goodness and mercy.
Read these parables and write down how you feel and what stands out as you read these. Matthew 20:1-16, Luke 15:11-32. Jesus is always after our hearts. Where is your heart on this matter? Be honest.

WEEK SEVEN: MARY

As I'm writing this we're just coming to the end of the Christmas season and my favorite songs of this season are the songs about Mary and Joseph - exploring the humanity within the Nativity story. Over the last month or two I've thought a lot about Mary and her journey. I wanted to explore her story together and I have been praying that you would come to this story with a fresh perspective and leave on the other side refreshed and strengthened for whatever God has been calling you to on your own journey with him.

Day 1: overview

During this study we have usually spent the first day of each week doing an overview. Today I'm handing this over to you - I'd encourage you to create your own overview. I'll give you a starting place in Luke but I'd like you to add to it. Create your own outline of the life of Mary, dig into the Word and see what you can find out about her journey.

Read: Here's a starting point for you as you study the life of Mary: Luke 1:26-56, 2:1-52, 4:14-30, 8:19-21, 24:1-12 and Acts 1:6-14

Respond:
What did you discover or rediscover about Mary?
Did you get a feel for what Mary might have been like?
Anything about her story that stands out to you?
How did you relate to Mary?
Do you feel God speaking to you through Mary's story?

Day 2: Mary's journey to Elizabeth's
Read:  Luke 1:26-56, Matthew 1:18-25,
Today we're reading about Mary's journey up to about the time Jesus was born. I want you to try to think of this from her point of view - not a Christmas-card picture-perfect romantic version - but not knowing how her story would be remembered. 
Optional: as you read these verses write down all of the words/phrases used to describe Jesus. Don't pass them over quickly, stop and sit with them. 


Reflect: It's pretty easy to gloss over this story because so many of these verses are so familiar but I hope that you took the time as you read today to try to imagine what it would have felt like for Mary to take this journey to Elizabeth's house and back again. What must it have been like to be a young woman, engaged to a respectable, hard-working man, to become pregnant? What must that have been like as a daughter, as a sister, and as a friend? How do you think they responded to Mary's condition? Obviously Joseph didn't take the news well at first. I want you to consider this from the point of view that Mary was right where she was supposed to be. Smack-dab in the center of God's plan for her life. She was blessed and highly favored and yet her life must have felt like it was falling to pieces. This is the thing I want us to look at as we consider the story of Mary. She was following God with her whole life. She was literally submitting her body, as well as her heart and mind to the will of God and yet her circumstances weren't exactly rosy. Sometimes we can fall into the trap of thinking that if we are obeying God, then His blessings will look a specific way - or at least not feel quite so hard. I think Mary's story is a beautiful example of when our obedience doesn't turn out to feel wonderful; yet I love that Mary's response to her circumstances is worship. In worship we get a fresh perspective and renewed strength to thrive in the place where God has called us.

Respond:
What do you think of when you think of a life that is "highly favored"?
Now compare this to Matthew 1:1819. What were her circumstances like at the moment?
How does Mary respond to her circumstances? How does Joseph?
How did you respond to today's reading?
How is God speaking to you through Mary's story?
Sometimes the junk in our life is a result of reaping what we have sown but sometimes it is part of God's plan. How do you feel about the painful, stressful or uncomfortable places in your life? Bring it to God. Ask him for fresh perspective and a renewed strength and commitment to worship Him in and through your uncomfortable circumstances.

Day 3: Mary's journey to Bethlehem
Read: Luke 2:1-21 especially verses 4-7
Try to keep yesterday's reading in mind. Look back at what you read and wrote down about what the angel Gabriel said about who Jesus would be.

Reflect: When I stop to think about it, and try to put myself in Mary’s position, this story is going pretty much exactly the opposite of how I would have thought things would go. If an angel appeared to me and told me I was highly favored and carrying the son of God, savior of the world, personally, I would expect to be birthing him somewhere other than in a barn, in a strange place, away from all of my family and friends.

This is a good moment for me to stop and pause and remember that God's ways are not my ways. His kingdom is not like ours. Jesus came to two very ordinary people. Maybe they even felt less than ordinary, like maybe just being ordinary would be a step up! Jesus was born in humble, hard circumstances, he lived a humble life and this helps me reorient my thoughts when in the middle of my own frustration or disappointment I feel like maybe I messed everything up. Joseph and Mary were right where they belonged, highly favored and giving birth in a barn.

Respond:
Is there anything in your life right now that feels like it is right up there with giving birth in a barn?
Is there anything in your life right now that is a source of disappointment or discouragement? Bring it to God and ask Him for His perspective on it.
Is He asking you to surrender some of your expectations?

Day 4: Mary's journey to Jerusalem
Read: Luke 2:22-52,
Today's story is kind of long but I just couldn't help myself. Try to read this from Mary's point of view, in real-time, without knowing what is coming next. I know that's kind of hard, but what must have been going through Mary's head as she watched her little son grow?
Optional extra reading Matthew 2, John 2:1-12, Matthew 12:46-49, Matthew 13:53-58.

Reflect: In the other stories we've looked at so far we've paused to acknowledge the gap between the calling and the commissioning, the "middle places" between the beginning of the journey and the end. This is kind of where today's reading finds us, at an awkward in-between stage. Think about this from Mary’s perspective: what must it have felt like for Mary to have her son prophesied over in the temple in Jerusalem? When her young son stayed behind in Jerusalem? Or when Joseph died and the burden for providing fell predominantly onto the shoulders of Jesus? What must it have been like for their family as they struggled through those years? Did Mary wonder about Jesus' future as he took up his earthly father's tools? What must it have been like for her as Jesus began his ministry? We see in John 2 that she had not forgotten how special Jesus was and it seems like she was eager for him to begin his ministry. What must it have felt like for Mary as she watched her neighbors reject her son as the Messiah? I wonder if her faith ever wavered. I wonder if her mother’s heart broke for her son. If she struggled to understand who Jesus really was and to comprehend what He truly came to do?

Respond:
What is God saying to you today?
Have you ever experienced a moment like Mary did with Simeon where someone spoke prophetically over you?
What did they say? Ask the Holy Spirit to remind you.
What about friends who remind you of your identity in Christ?
Do you have people in your life like the people of Nazareth? Do you have "doubters" in your life who question or contradict your identity and/or calling? Ask the Holy Spirit to guide you in being strategic about who you spend your time with and how you will respond to the "prophets" and the "doubters" in your life.

Day 5: Mary's journey to the first church
Read: John 19:25-27, Luke 23:49-24:12, Acts 1:6-14, 1 Corinthians 1:26-31
Today we're going to skip ahead and walk with Mary to the foot of the cross, on to an upper room in Jerusalem and into the first moments of the birth of the first church.

Reflect: Imagine for a moment that you and I are sitting beside Mary in an upper room in Jerusalem, with Jesus' brothers and disciples. Look around the room with her - who are these people? They are a pretty rag-tag group of ordinary men and women. A bunch of former fishermen, a former prostitute, there's a former political radical, and a former tax collector. There's the woman who was delivered from demons, Johanna, the wife of Herod's household manager. There's the spiritual one, and maybe sitting near him are his friends -- the ones who introduced him to Jesus. There are men and women, young and old, rich and poor but all pretty ordinary. I wonder if Mary thought back to those first moments with Jesus in the barn, and the shepherds who came to visit them. I wonder if she had finally realized that Jesus came to ordinary people and not to the opulent royalty or even to the religious big-shots of the day. He came as a servant and He established His kingdom amongst the least of these. This is a good moment to consider the smallness and ordinariness of our lives - yours and mine - and take a big deep breath. These are the spaces that God came in flesh to inhabit and still indwells by His Spirit.

Respond:
What is God saying to you today?
How has your perspective begun to shift this week?
What are the ordinary spaces in your life that you can offer to Him?


WEEK EIGHT: PETER

Peter, a disciple and lover of Jesus, one who walked with Jesus. I love Peter. You may often hear people talk about his hastiness with his words and perhaps he was a bit impulsive or spoke without thinking, but I see him differently. He was passionate and said what was in his heart, hiding nothing from Jesus. This allowed him to learn and grow in a way that we can't if we try to hide our thoughts from Him. We're going to study his time with Jesus. As you read and discover this week, let Peter's relationship with Jesus be your focus. We find bits of Peter's story written in the four Gospels: Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Let's begin to piece them together.

Day 1: overview
Read: Matthew 4:18-22, 8:14-17, 10:1-15, 14:22-33, 16:13-28, 17:1-8, 26:31-46, 26:58,69-75, Mark 1:16-20, 1:29-34, Luke 5:2-11, 9:28-36, 22:54-62, 24:12, John 1:35-42, 18:10-11, 20:1-10, 21:1-19

Reflect: I only gave you most of Peter's personal journey with Jesus. I'm leaving it up to you to do your own research. Flip between the gospels and read the different accounts of Peter's interactions with Jesus. Remember to stay away from "rabbit trails." Your focus is Peter's relationship with Jesus as his life shifts from fisherman to disciple.

Respond:
Write down what stands out to you in these passages.
What kind of ideas do you get about who Peter is?
Where were some of Peter's destinations? Map it out.
Do you have any questions? Write them down and reflect on them.
If you feel like there are some missing pieces to what you are reading, read before and after the passages you were given.

Day 2: called and prepared
Read: John 1:35-45, Matt 4:18-22, Mark 1:14-20, Luke 4:38-44, 5:1-11

Reflect: As I reflect on my own life, these passages affirm that God always prepares me for where He is taking me. When I used to read these verses in Matthew and Mark I always believed those men just got up from their boats and followed Jesus. No questions asked. I'd always hoped I could do the same, and I was nervous I'd get it wrong. But we see in John that Peter was introduced to Jesus before this moment.  He knew Jesus and already shared significant moments with Him.  It’s in this moment of first meeting Jesus that Jesus changes his name from Simon to Peter, just as God changed Israel's and Jacob’s names. He is the same God in the new testament as He is in the old testament. God is never changing. Isn’t that amazing?

Respond:
We are all called to follow Jesus. How are you following Him?
Does it seem scary to follow Him in the way you feel He is calling you to?
Reflect on your life. Are you able to see how God has prepared you for His plans for you?
Extra Verses Jeremiah 29:11, Psalm 139:16  Maybe you’ve read these plenty of times. But it’s so important to remember who you are. Your life is significant and filled with purpose.

Day 3: to be a disciple
Read: Matthew 10, 12:46-50, 14:22-33, 15:15-16, 16:13-28

Reflect: Discipleship is an incredible journey.  I only noted a few passages in Matthew of what it was like to be a disciple of Christ.  Imagine the years of being able to walk with Jesus! Imagine the pressure as He asked them questions or gave them instruction. Yet, Peter was brave to ask all of the "dumb" questions and gave the answers the other disciples might have been afraid to speak out loud. Jesus' love for them must have made it easy for them to be confident and keep following Him. Discipleship is about learning and growing from the one you are following.  Sometimes your answers are right and sometimes your answers are wrong and you've had to learn something new.

Respond:
Have you ever been discipled by another Christ follower? What kind of impact did/does this person have on your life?
If not, is there something keeping you from developing a relationship like this?
Discipleship requires us to put what we've learned into practice. How are you implementing what you've learned?
Learning something new can be frustrating/scary. Have these passages changed your perspective on discipleship?
Ask God to help you find someone to live life with. It is vital to spiritual growth.

Extra Homework: Read parallel passages in the other Gospels on Peter's and the other disciples' interactions with Jesus. Keep in mind the idea of learning and growing and all that entails.

Day 4: tested
Read: Matthew 26:31-75

Reflect: This is a hard one to reflect on. Notice Peter has made his way into the crowd to witness Jesus' trial before the high priest, Caiaphas and the Sanhedrin. Soon after Peter's denial of knowing Jesus, Jesus is crucified on the cross. Jesus predicted all of this, including Peter's denial. We'd all like to believe that, when it comes down to the moment, we would make a better choice.  "If I was Eve, I wouldn't have eaten the fruit." Or "I make mistakes, but none that big!"  All are sinners and if I were Peter, I would be sitting there weeping bitterly, too. You would, too. This idea crushes me, but we are not left there. And I won’t leave you there either.

Read: Mark 16:6-7,16:14, Luke 24:9-12, John 21:15-17, Proverbs 3:11-12, Hebrews 12:4-11

Reflect:
The passage in John is considered the restoration of Peter. Even before then it seemed Peter already knew he was forgiven. Peter was eager to reconcile with Jesus after His resurrection.  When Jesus was telling Peter that he is the rock He will build His church on (Matt 16:18), giving him authority, He knew Peter would deny Him. But he also already knows the love Peter has for Him and the repentant heart he has. Jesus forgives easily and is always after the heart.

Respond:
What are you taking away from today's passages?
Is it hard for you to believe the possibility that you could sin in the way Peter did?
It's not always easy to get up and repent when we feel like the offenses are too great. Have you ever felt that way?
How did you move past it?
In Luke Jesus rebuked the disciples for their lack of faith that He had risen from the dead (even though they walked with Him and knew Him!). Then He went on to give them the great commission. Does this make you feel differently about your walk with Jesus?

Day 5: becoming
Read: John 14:15-21, 16:5-16, Acts 1:8, 2:14-41

Reflect: When Peter walked with Jesus he was dependent on Him. The moment Jesus was taken away Peter became unsure and defeated. (Matt. 26:69-75) That is why we need the Holy Spirit, the power of Jesus, living inside of us. When He is with us all of the time we are more capable to do good (the will of God) than we could ever imagine. The Holy Spirit in us draws people to Jesus.

Respond:
Do you have the Holy Spirit living in you? If not, Read Peter's response to those who receive Christ (Acts 2:36-41)
What is your relationship with the Holy Spirit?
Are people drawn to Jesus because of you?
Write down your thoughts about Peter and his experience with Jesus and the Holy Spirit.
Is God prompting you to do more study on the Holy Spirit? Go for it!
Are you on the brink of something that you can't quite grasp yet?
Read 1 Corinthians 2:6-16 to end todays study.


WEEK NINE: JOHN

John is one of my favorite characters in the New Testament. He is known as "the beloved disciple" and his intimate relationship with Jesus gave him a special behind-the-scenes view of Jesus and his ministry. He wrote one of the gospels, which includes some of my favorite passages and one of the most famous verses of the Bible. He also wrote three epistles (letters) and the book of Revelation.  

Day 1: overview

Read: Matthew 4:18-22, 10:1-4, 17:1-8, 20:20-28, 26:36-38, Mark 3:13-19, 9:2-13, 38-41, 10:35-45, Luke 5:1-11, 6:12-16, 9:51-56, John 1:35-51, 13:21-26, 18:15-16, 19:25-27, 20:1-10, 21:20-24, Acts 1:12-14, 3:1-10, 4:1-3,13, 12:1-5, 1 John 1:1-4, Revelation 1:9-11, 21:1-4,10,22-27
Today we're going to do an overview of John's life. Go ahead and read the questions below (under "respond") and consider them as you read.

Reflect: I love how John went from being known as one of the "sons of thunder", asking Jesus to call down fire on unbelieving cities, to an elder who wrote some of the most gentle and tender words.

Respond:
Who is John?
What is he like?
What is his relationship with Jesus like?
How does he (and his relationship with Jesus) grow and mature?
How do you connect with John and his story?

Day 2: calling

Read: Matthew 4:18-22, Luke 9:51-56, Mark 3:13-19

Reflect: This is the moment when John is called into his ministry, and in this moment I want this to not be so much about John’s calling as much as it is about your calling. Jesus is calling you to a full-time, all-in walk with himself. Not necessarily in special buildings or with special titles, but in the ordinary day to day of your life. Jesus is calling you to walk with him in it, to choose the long obedience of Noah and the surrender of Abraham. To lay down our expectations and walk into whatever God has for us, with Him.

Respond:
Does anything you read so far about John surprise you?
What is God saying to you through this story?
Is there anything God is speaking to you specifically about your calling?
Look back through your notes for this study. What is Jesus calling you to specifically?

Day 3: transfiguration

Read: Matthew 17:1-8

Reflect: Jesus invited Peter, James and John up to the mountain where he gave them a sneak peek of his glory. I love Peter's response in this moment because it is so honest. He asked to live in this moment. And that can be my response too when I'm feeling close to God -- I just want to pitch my tent right here because it's so amazing. But Jesus took them back down the mountain and back down into ministry. I believe mountain-top moments are not where we live. They are special moments to prepare us for our calling -- moments when we reorient ourselves and get vision of what God's heart is for us right now. Then we get to walk back down the mountain and walk it out.

Respond:
What stands out to you in this story?
Have you ever experienced a time when God revealed himself to you in a special way?
What was that like?
How did that change how you thought about God?
How did that moment change how you lived your life?
How have you "walked it out" after a big moment with God?

Day 4: resurrection

Read: John 18:15-16, 19:25-27, 20:1-10, 21:20-24, Acts 1:12-14

Reflect: I love how in these verses we see John staying near to Jesus. He followed him from the garden to the house of the high priest. He was there at the cross with Jesus' mother. He ran to the empty tomb. This speaks to me ever so deeply and touches me where words begin to fail. I want my love for Jesus to be a love like that.  Through the Holy Spirit we are invited into a close friendship with Jesus, an intimate relationship - maybe not physically the way the disciples did, but no less real. Also, I want my friendships to look like that - to be there for each other in good times and when everything is falling apart.

Respond:
How is God speaking to you through this story?
What is your relationship with Jesus like?
What is keeping you from having a friendship with Jesus like John's?
How are you doing in the friendship department?
Is there anything keeping you from having true, close friendships like John's friendship with Jesus?

Day 5: revelation

Read: Revelation 21
These are some of my favorite verses in the Bible. I love that God gave John this glimpse into the future of all believers. As you read,  write down any words and phrases that stand out to you.

Reflect: There is so much to love in these verses. Sit with them and let them sit and sink into your soul. I never want to be so busy in my day-to-day life that I forget about my eternal life to come.

Respond:
What stands out to you?
What does it mean to you that there will one day be a new earth?
What do these verses say that new earth will be like?
How does that change your perspective for your “right now”?